Uh, good morning, Rahet.
Morning. Me again.
Yes, you again. No, don't worry, we had Dion three times.
There we go. Today I'm only wearing my Gisborne District Council hat, and I would
love to chat to you about, unitary authorities mostly,
because-
That'd be great. That would be it
... we are a, a, a-
Yep, that'd be great. We've got 15 minutes of your time.
Awesome.
Um, w- we've got your submission, thank you very much.
Take it as read, but highlight a few points and leave time for questions.
Yes.
Fire away. Thank you.
Awesome, and I've also got, Shane McGee and Jocelyne Allen here to
support me. So today I will focus on four areas of particular
importance for us here in Te Tairāwhiti that we ask you to
consider, addressing some, through some changes.
So let's start first off, there are only a few unitary authorities a-
across New Zealand, but you would be well aware that the government is
looking at moving more to that model in, in some way.
So we thought we would bring some stuff which obviously stands out for
us. Unitary authorities, as you know, do both regional and local
authority functions, both which will change substantially under this
new system. This means that the impacts of these bills for
Gisborne District Council and other unitary authorities are
different to those that regional and local councils will
experience. This is not recognized in the bills as
they are currently drafted. In fact, there are almost no
specific mention of unitary authorities at
all. A key example of how unitary authorities will be
affected differently to others is in the preparation
and also then the implementation of the new plans.
So let me use some examples with you.
Unitary authorities will have to, having already prepared the
regional spatial plan, prepare both a land
use plan and an environmental plan at the
same time, without any provision for additional
time to achieve this. Preparing three separate parts
of a combined plan will result in unnecessary
duplication and inefficiency. So
this duplication and inefficiency will then carry through to
how we implement these plans. The bills require
both a planning consent and a natural resources
permit, which in unitary regions will be issued by the same
council. For us, this is a backwards step,
as we currently only require one
consent under one plan. So what we are
asking is we seek explicit, explicit identification of
unitary authorities in this bill, and provisions allowing
us to avoid wasting time and resources, because that's ultimately
why the government is changing the bill, and we are happy to
discuss this, with officials in detail later, and it is addressed in
our, submission as well. Then I take you to our second point
is the implementation timeframes.
Um,
it is the timeframes for the development of the first generation plans
is not workable at all. We would be
given six months from the release of national
directions to prepare a full regional
spatial plan, which is not
doable when you look at the requirement for what this plan must
include, and the importance of the plan for the future prosperi-
prosperity of our region. In our submission, we have
suggested 15 months from the release of the national
direction would, would, would, would be more appropriate.
But I also know that some of our colleagues in other regions, such
as Canterbury, have s- said maybe what about 24
months to prepare robust first generation
spatial plans. Now the next, the nine-month timeframe for
preparing land use as well as na- natural environment
plans is unreasonable, particularly for unitary
authorities like us who have to prepare both.
This should be extended for unitary authorities to recognize our dual
workload to at least 18 months. Next, I would like to
quickly touch on regulat- regulatory relief.
Um, introducing regulat- relief in the current form,
will not work and it, it's aligned with rate
caps. The potential financial cost on re- of regulatory
relief will affect council's ability to keep funding within the
rates cap, while maintaining provision of
vital infrastructure and services.
This will be particularly felt in regions and districts like us here in
the T- Te Tairāwhiti, who has a very low rating
base. Transitional provisions resulting in historic claims
will exacerbate this and force our current community to pay
for previous private land use choices.
We can also see the regulatory relief resulting in a proliferation of
litigation through the Environment Court, which will just add to the cost
required to be borne by our ratepayers.
There's also a high probability that if regulatory relief is
not removed from the bills, protection of significant
sites will be unaffordable, and this will lead to further degradation
of biodiversity and natural, historical, and cultural
features across Te Tairāwhiti, and possibly the entire
country. Despite these concerns, we acknowledge that
commitments have been made for regulatory relief to be included in this
reform. Our submission is that if it is to
stay, sensible changes need to be made, and we've
made some, suggestions in our written
submission. And then second to last,
I would like to talk a little bit about sustainable land use
transition. Um, you
know what's been happening in the Te Tairāwhiti in the last few years,
what happens when we see these, extreme weather
events, and this is exacerbated by
unsustainable land use of highly erosion-prone
land, and how this relates to the proposals in this
bill. Our Sustainable Land Use Transition
program is the blueprint we will use toMove
our region forward. It has set out a bold but achievable
vision to transition highly erosion, erosion-prone land to permanent
resilient vegetative cover. We are investigate-
investigating s- certified sustainable land use plans as a
key transition delivery mechanism.
The Natural Environment Bill must make it
explicit that integration of freshwater farm
plans and property-specific erosion management
sus- such as sustainable land use plans is
permitted. Council has applied, applied for a plan stop
exemption to progress our sustainable land use plan change to
address land with high risk of erosion as we await this
decision. It is vital that we can carry such provisions
over to the new system to be enable this
transition to carry on. Explicit provisions
must be made in both bills for regions like us with extreme
natural, hazard risk to apply more stringent
rules than national defaults, rather than leaving this to
be addressed in national instruments.
We have started on this transition journey, and we need to make sure that the new
planning system provides the regulatory levers
required to get that right. And then just a few final
points. Um, te tiriti partnerships with Mana Whenua on protecting
Maori rights and interests are very important to us here, and
it's just not theoretical. We live and breathe them every day in our
region, with the highest proportion of Maori in the population of
Aotearoa. I encourage the committee to consider the points in our
submission and other submissions in relation to this very
carefully. And then secondly, the overlapping timeframes of
reform implementation we are responsible for, which is the resource
management, emergency management, the purpose of l- local
government, reorganization of local government, infrastructure
funding, rates capping, all-
Mm
... place a huge burden on our council and the whole
sector. We need resources to support this, otherwise it
will fall on our ratepayers. And in a world of restricted rates
increases, it will reduce what we have available to spend on
essential services. Thank you very much for your
time. And I have Joslin and Shane to answer
all the difficult questions.
Yes, and I'm, I'm just curious if... You're operating in a different time there.
I think the clock says five past eight, but never mind.
Um-
I'm in Wellington- So the time stops in Wellington.
Anyway, our first question comes from Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, Chair, and thanks for your submission.
I just wanted to pick up on one point.
Uh, obviously you made quite a broad, broad submission, but particularly around
your comments r- in, in your written submission around data system monitoring
and environmental data systems. Do you have...
I mean, are you using any existing systems that you think could be replicated, or
are you seeing inconsistencies across, you know, your, you know,
your areas? How could, how could government better enhance and support
that space
and/or through this bill?
Shane.
Uh, we have some specific data. What we would need to do would be to get
our technical people, and as has been said by a number of
other submitters, we're happy to provide that, that
information. Uh, most councils have quite significant data
sets, and that, takes a lot of resources to get
those, and actually ensuring that we can have those, applied
appropriately would be what we're asking.
Yeah, and one of the comments obviously from our environmental commissioner, you
know, it's, it's, it's one of the biggest, I guess, pain points he sees, or
opportunities. Are, are you seeing inconsistency across the
way councils report on that data or, you know, do we need more
standardization across...?
Standardization is always a good thing.
Uh, being aware of what is required and that, reduces costs,
makes things, as, as is intended by
the changes to the whole regulation, trying to get things standardized across
the country is a benefit.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Yep.
Uh, Lan Pham.
Kia ora. Thank you so much for your submission, and apologies that you have
to squeeze such, like, serious implications into
such a short time. Um, so I just wanna
pick up on a few things. So you say the life supporting capacity
goal is essentially too low of a bar, and you're looking for
ecological integrity and the same with biodiversity.
Instead of no net gain, you're looking for no net
loss. But you also talk about-
No net
... a significant emission, um...
Sorry, omission, not emission, being no
explicit reference to the integrated management of
natural resources. Can, can you describe in what way you would
like this recognized in the bill?
Joslin.
Um, thank you. Yes, and thanks for picking up
on some of the, more poignant parts of our
submission. Um, integration,
the way that, that we see it and, and certainly how we
felt it was adopted, and recognized through the men-
through the Resource Management Act, s-
became part of that, section 5 in part two, the sort
of engine room in which we were able to operate, through our planning
frameworks and, and ultimately the, the decisions we made.
So, we very much see, and certainly as a unitary authority,
the importance of, of integration across our, our asset
management, our planning,
over to the, protection of our, our, protected
taonga. We see it as vital that, the
integrated management, be uplifted, to the
extent possible.
Uh, Rachel
Thank you. Two questions. Uh, one is, you
were, and apologies I don't have the...
I'm having some tech problems, I don't have your submission in front of me.
But one, issue was you said the,
sediment plans for highly erosion, erosion-prone areas should be
permitted. If you could just tell us a bit more about that.
And then we also had Ngāti Porou in before the hapū
saying, that d-
the, part of the country that you're in has its own,
special issues, you know, with erosion-prone land and the
like. Beautiful part of the country, though.
Um, and that there needs to be some way of having
bespoke provisions in national direction, and if you want to comment on
that as well. Thank you.
Yes, so I'll ask Jocelyne to comment on that.
But just to make it
c- clear again is that we know we live in an area
where we have a special geology and
special weather now as well for the last five years. We can't change those.
What we can change, though, is what we do with our land and how we use that
land. And the work that we have done over the last t- two years, and,
and Jocelyne will talk about it, we need more stringent rules in order
to protect, our land. And if we don't have
those provisions, we, will see the
type of, disasters we've seen in the last five years.
So I'll just let Jocelyne tell you a little bit more about what we
are asking in order for us to protect our region,
the way that it deserves to be protected.
Great. Thank you. Um, thank you for the questions.
Um, so as, as you will have read and, and, most likely
seen the work around our efforts in, sustainable
land use, have culminated across a diverse group of, of
efforts,
you know, across from community involvement to our, into our policy
framework. So we have, applied for, for an extension of
our, sustainable land use, plan change.
And one of the, one of the solutions sort of
proposed or, or earmarked ultimately is the creation of a
sustainable land use plan. And, we, we
felt, the freshwater farm plan framework fit really
well with the intention and for it to complement our policy
framework and our regulatory regime.
Um, so what we would like to see is,
alongside the freshwater farm plan framework, the ability
for, the council to also, have
a sustainable land use plan that further, elaborates
on and ultimately goes back to that integrated view, and
can speak to and give effect to, managing the
highest risk, land that we have in this
region. So, and secondly on your,
points around Ngā Rohe Moana o Ngāti, nā Hapū
o Ngāti Porou and, and the act, in which we've been
operating,
within since 2019. Um, we definitely
support the provisions across both the bills that we see
for not only existing treaty settlements, but also the Takutai
Moana legislation, and the, the Ngā
Rohe Moana nā, nā Hapū o Ngāti Porou Act
2019. I understand, the importance
of our coastal marine environment and,
and am enlightened, heartened, we're heartened as a council
that these will be recognized and continue to be
recognized. Um, the, the desire, through
this act is not necessarily for exclusion but i- in
fact protection. So,
if, if we can, have the ability to provide
for more bespoke regulation, to enable
us to look through our nas- natural hazards and our climate change risks,
through the standardized, well, the legislation that, that
will be accompanying, this rollout through the policy statement
or in fact environmental standards we would, we would welcome
that.
Uh, well, thank you. F- f- f- unfortunately we have to leave it there.
Um, I have got a couple of follow-up questions, but they'll have to wait.
Um, so thank you very much. We appreciate your submissions.
Um, and we'll, have a great day. Cheers. Thank you.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Bye.
Thank you.
Our next submitter, Te Runanga o
Ngati Kua.
Kua.
I think what they are.
Brand.
It's only four of them.
Kia ora. Morning.
Yeah.
Very good.
Yeah, no problem.
Yeah, we can hear you speak up. I think we got you.
If you, if you take off the blue, the background there, we'll see both of you.
Yeah, we can only see one.
The blue.
Yeah, yeah.
But-
Like it's, sorted out, yeah. We'll just crack on then.
Mm-hmm.
We'll just try and, yeah, yeah. Yeah. I'll, I'll adjust it as we go.
Uh, kia ora koutou.
Ah, there we go. Bingo. Well done. Thank you.
Kia ora, good morning, ma.
Kia ora koutou nga manuhiri ma.
Yeah, yeah. We, we gotcha. Um, yeah, hi.
My name's Grant McCallum. I'm chairing the subcommittee this morning.
Uh, we have 15 minutes with you this morning, and we have your submission.
Please take it as read, but feel free to highlight a few points and then leave time
for questions. Fire away. Thank you.
Uh, nga manuhiri, nga reo, nga karangahao ma o te motu, ki hei mauri
ora. Uh, tenei te tamo ki a koe e tatiana mana
mo te committee me nga whanau ki roto ki te tenei rui.
Uh, mauri ora ki te whare. Uh, ko Tutamapai te maunga. Ko te hoere te awa.
Ko te hoere te waka. Raukaaukauata moana.
Matua Houtere te tangata. Te Hora te marae. Ngati Kuia te iwi.
Mai te iwi karakia. Uh, te iwi pakohi.
Uh, my name's Raymond Smith. Um, I am the kaikōrero speaker for
Te Rūnanga o Ngāti Kuia today.
I've worked for my iwi for over twenty-five years and hold a bachelor's degree in
Kaitiakitanga. Um, Tiakitanga o te whenua, o te awa, o te
moana. Uh, treaty negotiator, part of the
settlement, PhD development, and, post-settlement
imple- implementation, cultural revitalization, and part of the rōpū taiao,
that developed the iwi management plan.
Uh, my colleague here to my right is, Eugene Whakahuihui, te Tumu
Toi Hau, the CEO of the Te Rūnanga o Ngāti Kuia.
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to, to elaborate on our submission today,
as, as I see the submission is taken as
read. Thank you for that. Uh,
ko wai au? Uh, who, who are we? Um, my iwi Ngāti
Kuia are descendants of the first people of Te Tau Ihu.
People of Māui, Kupe, Matua Hautere.
We have ahikā roa throughout Te Kupe Nga Kuia, top of the South
Island, and carry the ancestral responsibility and obligations
to uphold,
to hol- uphold the mauri of our whenua, our awa, our moana, our
hau, our mātauranga tikanga kawa.
Me ngā tāngata me taonga. Uh, our submission has raised ninety-one
points and is, and is grounded in Ngā Kanohi Kārearea, the
Ngāti Kuia Iwi Environmental Management Plan, and in the
commitments/promises made to Ngāti Kuia during negot- na-
during the negotiations of our treaty settlement, Te Whakatau.
Um, that is the name of our settlement.
Uh, we support it-- we support the submissions of the Te Tau Ihu
Collective, a- and, and to
Hokainuana, who, was established as our settlement receiving
entity to deliver, treaty settlements and provide
specialist settlement oversight, who are also
ad- adversely affected by this, what we are calling a heinous piece of
legislation.
Um, our core issues. The bill does not uphold Te
Tiriti. Our central message today is this, the Natural Environment
Bill and the Planning Bill are insulting, undermining, dangerous,
and do not uphold the intent of Te Tiriti o
Waitangi. Agreeing to Te Whakatau, that's, that's Ngāti
Kuia Treaty settlement, allowed our people to move out of grievance mode and be
involved in mana enhancing future for our kaumatua, pakeke,
rangatahi, mokopuna ki roto ki te, ki te ao hurihuri,
this changing world. Ngāti Kuia learn from the past, we live for the
future. Uh, Toitū te Tiriti, the treaty
negotiations process was a very, very arduous task,
working with the likes of Michael Cullen, Parekura Horomia, and
all of their advisors in the Labour government, and then the National-led
government with John Key, the Ag Party, Māori Party, and
the, and the minister Chris Finlayson as, as a negotiator to our settlement
Te Whakatau. We were the first ones to go through this treaty settlement based on
the principles of the treaty in the, in the top of the South Island, which provided
New Zealand with a whole island settlement.
Still hasn't been done anywhere else.
Uh, to achieve our enduring relationship at two cents in the dollar
and a token land offers of ref- RFRs, first
right of refusals, deferred selection, titles with
. You know? Ngāti Kuia gave up eighty percent of fisheries
guaranteed under the treaty, eighty percent of our cultural space, and it's still
not enough. Still attacking our rights and principles under the
Tiriti. The treaty is the glue
that binds this country and our future.
Tui, tui, tui mātuia.
That was the call from Tuia two fifty, two thousand and nineteen when Jenny
Shipley, previous leader of the National Party, and Hutariwa
Barclay-Kerr led a dual heritage and a shared future kaupapa in this
country. The ethos was built into-- from Te Tiriti o
Waitangi. E waka eke noa. We're all in this
together. The treaty clauses in both bills are narrow,
procedural, and omit key treaty principles.
This is a significant backwards step from Section eight of the RMA which required
all decision-makers to take treaty principles into
account. You know, Section seven, to have regard for
Kaitiakitanga. Section six, the recognition and provision of
taonga.
Right? These are extremely, really important, along with Section five,
providing cultural wellbeing, which provides a cultural bottom
line process. Uh, the expert advisory group recommended
retaining that approach. This government's cabinet
explicitly rejected it. Doesn't sound right.
The system cannot function fairly unless all decision-makers are required to act
consistently with Te Tiriti. The bills
undermine our treaty settlement, Te Whakatau, the Ngāti Kuia Treaty settlement,
which was agreed on the understanding that the Crown would uphold our tino
rangatiratanga, mana motuhake, our rights, interests, and
expectations. The Department of Conservation needs to remain a
critical partner under the protocols. Agreed.
Agreed. You know? Our pākui, our mahinga kai, our
tīti. All these things are so important about the
understanding of the past so we can live for the future.
The department-- Um, the, the taonga and species, wāhi tapu, cultural
landscapes would continue to protect-- to be protected forever
in a manner appropriate and in line with wawata o Ngāti Kuia.
However, the bill cut across these commitments in several ways.
Uh, most urgently, the wildlife permitting is shifting away, shifting
away from the Wildlife Act. Clause one two eight out of the Natural Environments
Bill allows wildlife approvals to be, to be issued as part of the natural
resource permit, bypassing the Wildlife Act, and most importantly, Section
four. You know? The requirement to give effect to Tiriti.
Very important. This, this means decisions affecting taonga species can be made
without the obligation to uphold Tiriti principles or without Department of
Conservation,
despite DOC's explicit partnership role in our treaty settlement, Te
Whakatau. This undermines not just process, but outcomes the settlement was
designed to protect.
Um, Māori participation is reduced, not
strengthened.That is not the expectation that we were expecting.
The bill promises upfront the Māori participation, but it, but it fails
to deliver. There is no requirement to, to engage with iwi before
notifying the first national policy direction.
Iwi are given extremely short timeframes determined at the minister's
discretion. This continues to put Ngāti Kuia and
financial and capacity issues at the fore.
Notification thresholds reduce iwi ability to exercise
kaitiakitanga at the consenting stage.
Spatial planning committees and hearing panels are not required to include iwi
members. Alienation of key roles for Ngāti Kuia and others in
the back seat watching from the sideline again.
It reminds me during the treaty process of the early colonials and
the rec- and, and, and the records of keeping a fatherly eye on the
natives, and we know what's best for them.
The paternalistic treatment of Tangata Whenua is unacceptable.
For iwi like Ngāti Kuia, small in size but deeply invested in local
relationships, this shifts, this shifts the centralized
direction severely limits our ability to influence decisions in our
rohe.
Now, the limits in mātauranga are systems gap.
Cultural, now, the, the Ngāti Kuia supports environmental limits,
environmental limits, but they must include cultural and
Māori based limits. The priority of biodiversity values are
essential. Mātauranga Māori and how they are set, and
ours are set in whakapapa. Companion targets for restoration, not
just bottom lines. Without these limits
becoming, without these limits-- without these, limits become a tool
for managing decline rather than restoring the health of our natural
environment. Um, within our with, w-within our
process, NERO, the net enduring restorative
outcomes. Its net enduring, enduring
restorative outcomes is critical for long-term
sustainability. We can't just keep using and
degrading our, our natural environment.
What works for iwi? Now, now, with iwi-led approaches,
and delivery, we wanna emphasize a strong treaty.
Consistent partnership produces excellent outcomes.
Ngāti Kuia has demonstrated this
through, through our treaty settlements.
You know, the Blenheim Airport. You know, prop- property investments
right throughout the top of the South Island
and, and, and, and, and, and, and investment in infrastructure.
Kotahitanga mō te taiao, the collaborative integrated large scale
approach
to, to environmental management and long-term environmental
management. The Te Huia Eri restoration produc- project, you know, that
come from the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, you know, the
Ministry for the Environment that highlighted sedimentation, you know,
and we're still working on stage two.
Whenua ki tai ki moana. You know, from the mountains to the coast,
right out to the ocean, wherever these adverse effects are being felt by
our native biodiversity and by our people.
The Ruapaka, the Ruapaka wetland, you know, very
important. I've got a-- one thing, you know, working with industry to
create the first finfish open fin- open ocean aquaculture
project, really important. Board of Inquiry, RMA, all
of those key political things. Um, in
closing, you know, for timely, you know, so we can get some questions.
In closing, our request of the committee, Ngāti Kuia expect you to ensure
that the apology and promise from the government and agents be
upheld. A substantive treaty clause needs to be applied to all
decision makers. Treaty settlement and commitments, including DOC's
role, are upheld, enabled, and the protocols and promises--
enabling the protocols and promises.
Māori participation is strengthened, not reduced.
Input at all levels. Identified Māori land is defined broadly
and treated consistency.
Sites of significance of wāhi tapu protections are iwi-led and
realistic. Limits, including cultural and mātauranga-based
measures, long-term and binding.
And a cautionary approach
is, is, is necessary, in, in our, in
our views. Ngāti Kun- Ngāti Kuia
continues to work in partnership to build systems that protects the taiao, our
natural environment, and honors the agreements made in good faith.
Toitū te tangata, toitū te whenua, toitū te moana,
ā, toitū te Tiriti. Uh, we are happy, we're happy to take
questions. Uh,
Kia ora,
thank
you very much. Uh, our first question to Rachel Brooking.
Thank you. Uh, in your submission, you talk about the treaty
clause, and you want something like section eight back
in, but you make a comment about, well, if you are gonna have
a, a treaty clause that sets out responsibilities,
then it needs to relate to the area.
And I'm wondering, for your rohe, what would, what would such
a treaty clause look like, and would it need to be
specific to each different iwi's
rohe?
In, in short, we think that you need to start with
having a, a clause which has the same impact.
It would say suggest enhancing what's currently in the RMA
and obviously pulled into this legislation.
What we think is the cumulative effect is that the-- basically it's
diminishing, in general what
the-- these two pro-- bills propose.
Um, we, we do think, the fact that it is being
driven centrally, that there needs to be
space for some of those treaty, arrangements and
discussions to be enabled at the rohe level.
So I think you can still start with something which general-- which cuts across
both bills, which provides space for further discussions,
relevant to the spaces that are important to us in all iwi, I'd, I'd, I'd
suggest.
Thank you.
Uh, Ryan Hamilton
Tena koutou. I do have a genuine question, and thank you for your
submission. There's no uncertainty with
what your feelings are around certain issues.
Um, this is something which comes up and you'll, you'll be no strangers to the fact
it does get a bit of criticism. In- incorporating
mātauranga or Māori into some of the...
You talk around settlement, sorry, the, environmental limits, ex- et
cetera. Can you give us an example of how that interface would
work?
The, the Māori model?
Yeah, yeah. Sure.
Um, part, part of our, you know, understanding right now and, and using the,
the, the open ocean, finfish farm that we're
doing now, we've, not only doing, done baseline monitoring
on there, but our Māori monitoring is about tracking what's already there,
tracking change, our quarterly monitoring based on seasonal,
issues, seeing, what, what would bring along any adverse
effects from not only industry but environmental, issues as
well. Um, just hearing from the, the, the Gisborne District Council
or the Dist- District Regional Council, you know, when we had our two storm
events down here, and then straight away the cyclone happened up in the
East Coast, down, down there. We, we've seen heaps of environmental,
issues going, going into the ocean, into the receiving
environment.
And so how, how do you-
I suppose just to add, to add to that, sorry, is the, you've, you've still got
to create the space for us to, to have that, to have that in
place. For example, we're well practiced in, applying our
Māori model, to doing assessments, across different
spa- spaces with different partners.
Um, that is because we've come to the table, we've worked out
ways of bringing in their, their science, our
mātauranga, and our understanding, not only the way it looks
now, but the way it looked when we look through our whakapapa and the way that we
hope that it'll grow into over time.
So it, it's, it's about enabling the space to have that kōrero so that we
can continue to bring in both our perspectives, our
understanding of mātauranga, and to
inform the establishment of, national direction
and, limit setting as well. So again, it's a bit
vague on how we're gonna get to that at the moment across these two bills.
So what w- I'd expect from all you is a bit more clarity on how this comes
together, and then making sure that we have the opportunity to
inject such, such as our Māori model in through limit setting and into the
discussions around, national direction as well. Kia ora.
Appreciate that. Thank you.
Look, unfortunately we've run out of time.
We've, come to the end of your submission period, but thank you very much for
your submission today. Very... A lot of passion, a lot of, ent- there, which is
great, so have a great day. Thank you. Cheers.
Kia ora chair. This
committee.
Right. We'll bring up our next submitter.
Is the Marlborough, Marlborough District Council.
The mayor, I see the mayor there.
Ah. Tena koutou, and thank you, Mr.
Chair, and thank you for the opportunity, to address the committee today
on the Planning Bill and the Natural Environment Bill.
You have 15 minutes of your ti- of your, your time. Thank you very much.
Appreciate it, and, look forward to possibly some type of questions
once you've addressed this. Really appreciate it. Thank you. Fire away.
Thank you. Will do. Uh, look, we recognize these bills will have a
significant impact on councils, h- how we function, and how
communities and resource users and our industries will
interact with the planning system.
Uh, some background to assist the committee.
Uh, the Marlborough District Council has operated as a unitary authority for over
30 years. Of course, this means that we have the functions and responsibilities of
both a regional and a territorial authority.
In terms of the scale of our operation here in Marlborough, we're responsible for a
land area of over one million hectares.
That's the largest geographical area of the five unitary councils,
excluding the anomaly, which is Auckland.
Uh, we have one of the longest and most intricate coastlines in New Zealand,
and including the vast Marlborough Sounds.
We have a relatively small population here, approximately 52,000
people, but our region consistently performs at a high
level with a strong primary production and export sector, and a
strong tourism economy.
We are well known, and, and many of you will know us as the largest wine
region in the country. Uh, we account for around three quarters of the
country's wine production, 70% of New Zealand's vineyard
area, and nearly 90% of New Zealand's wine exports.
Viticulture underpins our GDP, and I, highlight those
facts because they become important, later on, as we get to our
request. We're New Zealand's largest aquaculture producer, with almost
600 marine farms within our coastal waters.
We have a strong commercial fishing sector, forestry, farming, horticulture
industries, and of course, in case anyone misses the news, we're the home,
gateway, to the South Island hosting the very
infamous Interisland Ferries.
So as a unitary authority, our position is quite unique in being able to
integrate the, management of land use, which is generally, of course,
a territorial responsibility, with the management of other natural
resources, the regional responsibility.
And this, approach has influenced the way the council has approached our
district planning. We now have a second generation plan in
place in Marlborough, the Marlborough Environment Plan, or the MEP as
we affectionately know it. Uh, it's substantially operative.
Uh, it's relatively unique in that it combines both the regional and district
planning functions into one combined document.
It's one set of rules. It's a one-stop shop for
all resource users. So our submission to the
committee has covered a, a range of points, in its, written
submission, ways that you can, tweak or improve the,
legislation. But today I just want to cover off two specific
points, to draw the committee's attention, to them,
and to make a request.The first is quite simple.
We wish to retain Marlborough as a separate planning region.
Uh, the second is a request to deem the Marlborough environment plan as an
operative combined plan under the new
legislation. Taking the first, Marlborough as a
separate region, council's very pleased to see the bill recognize and provide for
Marlborough as a separate region, enabling us to create our own
regional spatial, natural environment, and land use
plans. While our friends over the hill in
Nelson and Tasman may be in the throes of discussing a marriage of
convenience to each other, that proposal is unique to
them. We don't want to get in the middle of their complicated courting
relationship.
Uh, beyond the complications of the pre-nup matters that they're going to need to
work through, there are actually some very sound catchment and planning reasons
for Marlborough retaining its plan, and our resource and catchment
responsibilities. Geographically, we are of course separated from
Nelson and Tasman, and our boundary consists of the mountainous and very
empty Richmond Ranges. Um, quite importantly
for RMA purposes and spatial planning purposes, we do not
share any natural catchments with Nelson and Tasman.
And our East Coast climate and the industries, that it supports are uniquely
Marlborough. Uh, and so we have a strong and distinct identity as a
result. These factors were recognized in the previous
RMA reform process in the decision to allow us to undertake our own
planning, and carry through to these new bills, and it really is quite simple
in that we ask the committee to confirm the retention of Marlborough as a separate
planning region. The second m-more substantial
and material change that we're asking the committee to consider today,
and in its deliberations, is providing for our current combined
plan to be deemed a fully operative plan under the new
legislation. As a region, Marlborough has
consistently demonstrated that we can achieve economic growth within
environmental limits and through a sophisticated planning
framework.
The MEP that I mentioned earlier is a brand-new second-generation
plan. It is now substantially operative, and it provides for a
very settled planning framework for our resource users.
The certainty of our plan currently gives confidence to industries and to
businesses, and therefore to our economy.
It enables long-term investment decisions to be made.
And as Mayor Nick Smith pointed out to the committee in his presentation,
earlier, I think last week, you cannot underestimate the monetary cost
to communities either of developing new plans.
Our current combined plan, council worked alongside
individuals, community groups, residents associations, iwi industry,
and stakeholders, the likes of Port Marlborough, Kiwi Rail,
Manawa Energy, MPI, Ministry of Defence, because of course, we host a
defence air force base here, which requires,
specific planning requirements.
Many of whom also engage legal counsel and
experts. And the parties to the plan really did contribute
significant time and money into the process.
They were committed throughout, and collectively, we've worked together to achieve
a very settled result. To date, the cost
to council to develop the plan has been ten million dollars.
The marine farming and aquaculture in New Zealand invested over two point four
million in the process, and Wine Marlborough spent seventy thousand dollars just on
the hearing process alone. Uh, all of that has been
spent in the recent years, and council doesn't want to see that investment of
either ratepayer money or of all of the contributing parties' money
lost in the transition to the new system.
And it's really not in anyone's interest to re-litigate, these matters
again. They've just been settled. They're working well.
And I note, and it's just a pragmatic observation for the committee, it is
certainly not a political one, that with rates capping, the extent to which
councils will be able to fund development of new-- these new plans will require
trade-offs. Uh, trade-offs can be made, and indeed, they must be made for
priorities. But the reality is that Marlborough ratepayers and
industries shouldn't have to make them again right now, when
we've just funded a new plan. And that's why we seek, and this
is really important for the note-takers in the back of the room, a
specific legislative provision in Schedule one of the
planning bill under the transitional provisions for our
plan to be deemed a fully operative plan until twenty
thirty-three. Practically, what this will
mean for Marlborough is that the time frames for developing our new regional
spatial plan and others will be pushed back.
That's not to say that council will not begin to mine our existing plan to
prepare our regional spatial plan, because we do see that as a key
strategic document under the new system.
We're just saying this should not be rushed.
And we think that we are uniquely justified to ask for this exemption,
of the committee. We've achieved and agreed, as I mentioned, with
all parties, a good planning resource management outcome through our combined
plan. Uh, we don't want to destabilize our regional economy by
immediately dismantling that back into its separate plans.
The security and certainty provided by the MEP enables our industries to
invest now. They know the policy background they can operate
within, for the coming years. Uh, and there are many
examples, that are pertinent to industry to support this
request, but time is of the essence.
Uh, but I would like to provide one for context to assist the
committee. Uh, the example is that settled water allocation
framework. As an East Coast region, Marlborough is one of the
driest regions in New Zealand. Uh, a sufficient and
re-- reliable supply of water is of fundamental pur-- importance
to our primary industries, particularly our wine and viticulture
industry. Holding a water permit here is
directly linked to a vineyard's operational viability, its value,
as well as its financial borrowing capacity.And I just want to repeat
that because of the importance to both, the users and to Marlborough and
our GDP. The water permit that they hold under our plan is
directly linked to their operational viability, which you would expect, but also to
their land value and its financial borrowing capacity.
So water security for the viticulture industry is ultimately underpinned
by the certainty that's provided in our Marlborough environment plan.
It's understood, it's relied on by the users, the resource users, and
it's also understood well by the commercial lending institutions that
support them. So if you recall the figures I gave at the beginning of my
presentation, this means that the certainty, provided by our MEP
framework is underpinning nearly ninety percent of New Zealand's wine
exports, and it certainly underpins Marlborough's
GDP. Uh, at this stage, we don't have clarity of what the
new water allocation methodologies and standards will be in the new
national instruments. And quite frankly, the viticulture industry
really needs the security of the current allocation to--
regime to continue for a period of time.
Uh, requiring us to unravel our very recently agreed framework and
transition will, in all probability, have an associated
destabilizing effect on the viticulture industry and its investments.
And I can't stress this enough, at the very time it does need a stable and
reliable operating framework. I'd like to draw the
committee's attention, to the fact that Wine Marlborough is in
support of allowing the Marlborough environment plan to continue as a fully
operative plan for the time requested.
I understand that they haven't had speaking time, but their written submission
is quite clear in this.
Look, we recognize as a council, our two decision-makers, that it's always wise to
provide a plan B. And another option for the
committee's consideration, if it were not deeming, would be
to add a provision to the legislation to enable the minister, perhaps
on application by a local authority, to extend the
relevant statutory limits for notifying a plan for, for
instance, no longer than ten years for any plan that
perhaps was made operative within the previous two years.
Uh, particularly where that's desirable to support investments made by
industries, it, who are actually allocated resources under
that plan. But despite mentioning, the idea of a
plan B to the committee, we really are respectfully requesting
that the committee recognize that we are seeking, more certainty for our
plan and for our industries and for our regional economy, so
as not to destabilizing them. We are seeking the certainty of, embedding in
legislation so that we do not, have to wait through the election
period, and decision-making period for, a new
minister. Uh, and confirming that we would like the
legislative provision embedded in, in, for the Marlborough
environment plan until twenty thirty-three.
I am going to leave it there, so I hope I have left enough time for questions
because there may be something, in detail in our submission, that the
committee would wish to, gain more information on. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you, Anne Nadine. Um, Lan
Pham.
Thank you so much for your very detailed submission.
Um, I-- there's so many parts to pick up on, but the
one that I'd love to just hear the practical
experience of is the integration
aspect that you bring up and the fact that you
are, you know, this whole... the point of this reform is to
enable better integration. But you talk about how
the compartmentalization of the built environment
and natural environment actually means you may be
less able to integrate decisions.
Can you talk us through what that actually looks like for you on the ground?
I'm going to hand, to Perry Hoare, our integration expert, because he'll give
you the best answer.
Uh, as we've said, the way in which our plan operates is
to, integrate our regional and district planning functions.
So to continue that wine example, a really good example, if you want
to establish a, a winery on the Wairarapa plains to process your
grapes, currently you'll need both regional and district,
consenting. Uh, the way in which we operate here in a unitary setting
is that winery operator makes one resource consent
application, so there's only one process for them to
deal with. They do it through the one council, and through that
processing, you can look at the effects of land use on other natural
resources. And you will have noted in our submission that's a concern we do
have about the separation into two bills, is the
inability to look at the wider effects of land use on those other natural
resources.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much. And then presumably, that would take more
resource from the council and almost, like, you, you potentially will be forced
to silo
out those different functions. Is that the case?
Yes. And, and having operated so long as a unitary council, I'm not quite sure how
we do it. It's just become second nature to integrate those regional and
district functions. Um, from a community perspective, they
just... at the end of the day, a resource user just wants to know what the
requirements are. They, they don't really care if they're a regional or district
planning function, and we work hard with them to ma-- ensure that,
any effects of land use are integrated.
At, at the moment, the resource user can apply under one plan.
But in the new system, they'll have to apply under two separate plans for,
say, the land use component on-- under one and the water take under another for
the same development. So you got two notification tiers again and then two
separate legislative requirements.
So it's actually more difficult for our resource users to manage the two
separate plans as opposed to one that they have to deal with now.
But one of the solutions for the committee's consideration could be, the
bundling of the consents and a, a single hearing.
That's right. So we would seek the ability to bundle those consents across the
legislation as well as a combined hearing.
And we've also sought the ability to have regard to the natural environment
plan in determining a land use consent
Okay, look, I think unfortunately we have to leave it there.
Your, we've, used your time. Uh, really appreciate it.
Thank you very much. Have a great day. Cheers.
Thank you.
Our next submitter is ... We've got the Lighting
Council of New Zealand, I believe.
Brian.
Yes. Hello. Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um-
Uh, just we have, 15 minutes of your time.
Thank you very much. Um, and, we'd love it if you had a bit of time for
questions. Please, please take your submissions read. Thank you. Bara.
Thank you. Thank you for, for the time today.
I have a concise six to seven-minute presentation to,
reinforce some additional mat-
Great
... and, and some additional material, so not to re- reinvent the wheel
here. Um, a brief introduction of me.
Um, I'm the executive director of Lighting Council New Zealand, which is
the industry association for lighting, sector
in New Zealand. My 40 years experience in lighting engineering, design,
and environmental consultancy, and probably most relevant to this,
conversation is, 12 years of international
experience with IEC and ISO committees on,
Geneva-based committees on environmental aspects for lighting, which include
light pollution and other related matters.
So first and foremost, this bill really is a once in a
generation opportunity for step change advancement for design,
installation, and management of outdoor lighting applications in New
Zealand, for, overall,
benefits, environmental, social and economic benefits for all New
Zealanders. This bill has the potential to remedy the current
overall lack of good awareness, lack of understanding, lack of
national harmonization, and lack of enforcement in the application
of outdoor lighting via New Zealand's existing standardization
framework and, that apply to both public and privately
owned spaces.
So an open question here on the, on the bill,
as it stands, what are emissions?
The effects of light at night and any resultant light pollution need to be formally
recognized as a high impact emission that may have unintended and
potentially detrimental consequences similar to other
well-recognized emissions and pollutants to air, land, and
water. Uh, in this case, the upside is that any
light pollution mitigation measures implemented through better lighting
design and the use of better technologies have immediate and
ongoing positive effects with no residual or legacy
environmental burdens left behind.
Um, a, a brief comment on lighting technology advancements in recent
years, the New Zealand lighting engineering profession and the
lighting supply industry is currently providing absolutely
world-class techniques and technologies that are financially
justifiable with attractive commercial return on investments based
on whole of life economics. Uh, the main,
emergent technologies currently used in New Zealand and growing,
quite, quite, quickly with time are dimming and switching control
systems to reduce the light levels during off-peak
periods. They can be simple standalone units for almost no
additional cost, or they can be more complex internet connected systems
which all of our main cities have and, and,
have at the moment for controlling of public lighting.
Uh, environmentally preferred warm spectra amber or red light sources,
which are currently much in the news and commentary regarding
environmental protection in relation to dark skies and to,
environmental impacts, and color selectable spectra, cooler
to warmer light colors, to put it, put it bluntly, for optimized
human safety and environmental protection.
We have all of those technologies in use in New Zealand at the
moment, but we could be doing better with broader,
broader application and more, more,
nuanced use. Um, the accelerated funding subsidy from New
Zealand central government to councils for eighty-five percent of the costs of
LED and smart controls has advanced the forefront, New Zealand to
the forefront of public lighting system best practice
worldwide. Uh, this inch, intervention was approved in
2015 by the then transport minister, the Honorable Simon
Bridges. The six-year span of the NZTA administered,
administrative funding program to New Zealand councils has
provided most councils with absolute best practice
controls equipment. But the open question here is: Is
this equipment being used to best effect to switch off or dim
off-peak, light levels at off-peak times to reduce light
pollution? We're not sure about that, and I don't think anyone
is, is sure about that. Um, but,
it's the well-documented reasons for going with smart control systems with
LEDs is to have m- is to generate massive savings on
electrical energy and maintenance costs.
But we also have this facility to keep better environmental outcomes if we scratch
our heads a bit more closely as, as a country and as a, a, a local
government community. The need for balance among stakeholder
interests, the goals and desires of the various stakeholder groups in the
light at night arena are very multifaceted, and the specific
desires of some interest groups can and do conflict with others.
We have a very wide range of, wide and diverse range of, of interest
groups: astronomical, ecological, pedestrian, road and path users,
vehicular safety, illuminated outdoor advertising, and asset
owners who in- including councils, or especially councils I should
say, who invest capital finance and energy and maintenance
costs, and we have the sports stadium operators that, that
have the potential to create, significant unintended consequences in
terms of light at night. Um, all of these interests introduce the need for
technical and economic trade-offs, and the open question is: How
do we reach fair and reasonable consensus with balanced
outcomes?Uh, we have current
lighting technical standards. The term that's used in the bill is,
is, national instruments and national
standards with both with small letters, and I, I would portray
that we have national standards with capital letters,
ASNZS and NZS standards, both of which for
public lighting and light pollution are very up-to-date,
and New Zealand is very much represented in these joint ASNZS
standards. We have one called ASNZ 1158, which has a
whole range of doc, aspects for quantification of
lighting impacts, both positive and negative, and we have another called Control
of the Intrusive Effects of Outdoor Lighting, which is
absolutely fair and square positioned to minimize,
light pollution impacts on both dark skies areas
and for, for wildlife and, and living
creatures. And we have things like maximum glare limits, maximum spill
light limits, curfew limits, and recommendations on
special spectral color applications for protected national areas
and, and similar applications. Um, however, there are no
New Zealand specialists on either of these committees, these joint Australian-New
Zealand committees, to provide New Zealand relevant environmental,
astronomical, and ecological expert input, and this appears to
be a gap in New Zealand's representation.
ASNZS standards have a long-standing position in the New Zealand built
environment design and regulation arena, with multi-
multiparty consensus processes that could continue to contribute
to developing any future environmental protection, requirements that
may be required. So what about future lighting
standards? What could we use? A potential new topic solution
is for an NZS, a New Zealand-only standard, which could be
developed for a customizable template for local authorities to
implement the appropriate Australian-New Zealand standards as New
Zealand harmonized bylaws. This could be based on the two established
standards that I've just mentioned and be readily developed at relatively low
cost. And finally, outdoor lighting environmental
protection for New Zealand. Are we going to make progress by market
pull or by regulation push? There needs to be
both, both carrot and stick, in our opinion.
There is much commentary and opinion expressed on the internet world and the
mainstream media about light pollution international initiatives, and the
invoking of national regulation by some big
Thanks
very much. Appreciate that. Now, I've got, I've got a
question I'll kick off with. I just want to understand, you talk about as
recommendations incorporating national standards in and around
lighting. How would... And just, I mean, you, you did mention,
yourself the, like, stadiums and so forth.
Is there any chance that you could end up with a, a potential conflict between a
standard and the use of things like, you know, lighting at night for sports
stadiums?
Uh, y- yes is the answer. The potential for conflict is,
is most certainly there. However, such
part-time use, if I could call it that-
Yeah
... like stadiums, like sports facilities, are only on for X hours per week
or, or per year or, or such like.
Yeah.
And generally they, they have, concessions to allow
for, you know, if it's a, a big football game or, or, or the Commonwealth
Games or something like that. Clearly that has, out- requirements
outside the norm. And, but these standards that we have
at the moment, and have used for many, many years, and have been updated,
in my 40 years in the industry quite a
number of times, allow for options.
They are not, "This is the what you do in, in one, in one region or
another," because they have widely varying, requirements.
So the standards that we have for roading, public lighting, street
lighting, and obtrusive light allow for the,
the selective int- selective application according to the
zones. And in particular, the obtrusive lighting standard
has, electable requirements for
s- UNESCO reserves, International Dark-Skies Association dark skies
reserves. It, it might be the, you know,
a, a, a, a, a game reserve, a, a penguin sanctuary,
or, um-
Yeah
... or seabirds or something like that.
These are absolutely allowed for, and particular areas,
l- let's say like Kaikoura or the MacKenzie District, which have economic
and, and social support for very
stringent, or, or, or particular light control,
applications can absolutely dial up what they need
that will be supported by their, their residents and their ratepayers and, and,
and fit with the frameworks that I've just mentioned.
Thank you very much. And Lan Farm has a question.
Tena koe, Brian. Thanks so much for your submission.
Um, just so I'm clear about this, so you
think that the, the general purpose of
the Natural Environment Bill could
include, like, the e- effects of outdoor lighting, but you're looking for
specific reference to it?
Yes.
Where do you think that could
best fit? Like, is it at the high level of the
goals, or
is there somewhere else that you perceive, even, like, in the planning bill
or something, like, where, where do you think it would best fit?
It would be... It wouldn't be at the f- the highest level.
It would be, it, it would be at the specific level in the environment
bill. Um, we surveyed both of those bills.
None have used the term light in any way or light emissions in,
in any way, so that was a bit of a warning flag for us.
And my earliest, comment was about emissions include lighting
rather than just pollutants to dust in the air and, and chemicals in, in,
in the soil, et cetera.
Mm.
Um, but that would fit in the, in the what to
do, requirements rather than the, the need to
do requirements at the very highest level.
Okay. So it could, like you're saying, the national standards that
come later, it can fit-
Yes
... in those?
Yes. Yes.
But-
And when we looked at them in the bill first, the, the term national standards that
were used, and, you know, and my colleagues in, in, in my industry, we
waved our hand and said, "Hey, we've already got these," you know.
Hopefully, they don't want to introduce more or develop more.
That would really be confusing and duplication, et cetera.
So it would be in the implementation of the national
standards as they are portrayed in the current bill.
And, we are saying, as, as an industry group, that,
these are
th- the- these are really willing and able to be inserted at the appropriate place.
Now, that doesn't mean they can't be improved, they can't be more nuanced
to cope with more finely tuned environmental requirements,
and that is almost an ongoing sort of requirement as, as we progress
to the future with changing technologies and changing sort of design,
ethoses and, and, you know, social,
social values and social emphases. So, yeah.
Uh, w- w- we are already, we, New
Zealand Inc. is already well-equipped to invoke,
tighter, environmental protection for lighting,
measures in a quantified with stated
n- numerical limits, when required by your
planning processes.
Okay. Look, thanks very much, Brian. Really appreciate your submission.
We've met time. Um, and, that, thanks very much and, have a great
day. Cheers.
Thank you. Thank you, all.
Right. We have our next submitter, which is the Dark Skies
Group, Royal Astronomical Society of New Zealand, I
believe. And we have, is it
Steve?
Ah, there we
go.
There we go.
Steve, g'day. We have-
Kia ora.
I'm Rob.
G'day. Good, good morning. It's still just morning.
Um, welcome to the, Environment Select Committee today, the
subcommittee. Uh, I'm Grant McCallum, the chair.
We have 15 minutes with you. Uh, please take your submissions read, but feel free
to highlight a few points and love if you leave time for questions.
Floor is yours.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much, and good morning to Brian King from the
previous speaker too. Um,
good timing.
Yeah.
Um, so I'd like to introduce, m- well, my guest
here, Nalani Davies, also from the Royal Astronomical
Society of New Zealand, and she is currently,
president of Dark Sky International, who,
accredit the Dark Sky places,
around the world. So she's currently the president of that
international, organization.
Um, so we might be able to answer,
Lan's question there too,
shortly. So the development of, these
bills,
is essentially to enable, enable development and
enable progress. Um, so the intention,
of, was to also pay heed to the
following, safeguarding the natural environment and human health and
improving regulatory, quality in the, planning
system. So we would, like to
suggest, that planning bill subclause
14 (2) ,
so this is, with 14 (1) , this
allows future management, maybe through the national
standards or within the, the, the act
itself. Um, so it includes s- such things
as areas of high natural character or the coastal environment, wetlands, et
cetera, outstanding natural landscapes and features.
But we would request that a further paragraph be added
there, so that,
section 14 (2) does not restrict management of
artificial light. So that's perhaps where that leading
statement or, or, provision could go.
Now, if I can leave you, you know, provide you with a, a thought that
drives me, and that is that light is one of the most
powerful stimuli to impact our health and the health and existence of
everything around us, and therefore, we must be careful how
we use it. So half our
environment is in daytime, and half of it is at night, and equally,
they're, they're equally importantUm,
we've emailed through, to the committee a supplementary
document, and this was a survey carried out by,
Department of Conservation staff, and it was a social s-
survey about New Zealanders' connection to the night
sky. And so this naturally representative survey
assessed New Zealand's connection with the night sky and their attitudes towards
artificial light at night, especially the impact of, of the
night sky on astronomy, environment, energy consumption, public
health, and culture.
It identified that 77% of the people surveyed said
protecting the night sky is important.
50% was very important, 27 moderately,
important. And so the researchers,
confirmed that a social license exists for initiatives to
protect locations with natural dark sky and for
strengthening natural lighting guidelines and
regulations. So committee, you've got the, got the
green light to go ahead. Thank you.
Um, so there's also been some work going on,
from-- with Nalani and some parliamentary
members, on a,
possible member's bill, to support
this-- the, the approach of protecting the night
environment, so that a, a, a
draft member's bill has been prepared and, and is available if
you, if you would like a copy. Um, so
they-- with, with discussions with several members of
the parliament, they have gained support for it in principle, and
notably none has expressed any opposition.
So there's a-another green light.
So just as general discussion, artificial,
or human health and natural environment implications of, of
lighting at night.
So it's a rising issue in both urban and rural areas, has
far-reaching consequences for the environment, human health, and
ecosystem. It disrupts natural cycles such as animal
migration, plant growth, human circadian rhythms,
leading to health problems like sleep disorders and
reduced melatonin production. It also obscures the night sky,
diminishing the ability to study and appreciate astronomical
phenomena.
To mitigate the effects of light pollution, individuals, communities, and
policymakers can adopt strategies like using energy
efficient and properly shielded lighting, as Brian has
suggested, implementing dark sky initiatives,
and ri-raising, public awareness about
responsible lighting practices.
So that's that educational awareness raising, you know, from
the bottom up type approach. By taking collective
energy, collective action, we can balance the benefits of
artificial light with the need to preserve natural darkness,
promoting ecological balance and improving quality of life for all
species. So clearly,
you know, in general, there's a tension between development and the
natural environment and human health, and perhaps one of the most visible
of these is light pollution from urban and
developed areas.
So New Zealand's, research, has shown that
there's been a significant increase in the amount of lit areas
in New Zealand, thirty-seven point four percent between two
thousand and twelve and two thousand and twenty-one.
So that's, that exceeds our population growth and things.
Uh,
and that came from a, a survey, Lighting Trends Reveals
the, the State of Dark-- of New Zealand's Dark Sky
Cloak. So sky glow, which is that
accumulative effect of out-output of light,
so all of the lights in a, in a built-up area contribute
to a glow that we're all familiar with as we approach a city from,
from a dark environment, dark surrounding area.
So that's this atmospheric scattering of light from developed areas,
and it spreads well beyond the lit area.
And the sky glow impacts the natural environment both inland
and outwards across the coastline out into the
ocean. Lighting regulations were introduced by the
Mackenzie District Council in nineteen eighty-one to protect
the Mount John University Observatory in
Tekapo, and these regulations formed the basis of the
successful application for the Mackenzie Basin area
to form a gold standard international Dark Sky
Reserve. I'm, h- my-- one of my other
hats is that I'm chair of the board for that Dark Sky Reserve.
So we've recently d-noted that sky glow from
Timaru is now visible from the observatory in Tekapo,
seventy-five kilometers away. And this is a recent
development, perhaps following development in the city or the
introduction of blue-rich LED lighting, which
scatters in the atmosphere nearly three times as much as the former
sodium lighting.
So, intrusion of light from distant places is not
welcome, nor is it inevitable. There are
ten Dark Sky and, international Dark Sky places
accredited in New Zealand from Great Barrier Island
in the north to Rakiura, Stewart Island in the
south. And another thirty groups around the
country have expressed interest, with some of them nearing their
accreditation success. And this is a
grassroot, volunteer-led organ- development that has provided
employment and tourism exposure for New Zealand around the
world.A critical feature of becoming a dark sky,
accredited dark sky place is that there must be lighting
regulations, to limit unnecessary
light, especially into the sky. Other requirements exist and
can easily be met. The ability of local government to
include and enforce these regulations in their district
plan must be retained. Failure to
con- continue this ability will risk the cancellation of 10
dark sky places in New Zealand, along with the, with preventing
future places.
So the Royal Astronomical Society have been, you know, active
for quite some time, and we've, we've been advocating for probably about
three decades. 20 years ago, the Illuminating Engineers
Society of Australia and New Zealand invited re- the, our
society to contribute to dark sky lighting awards at their internet,
their annual lighting awards. So in two recent
years, Port of Lyttelton has received two dark sky
awards for lighting refits on their coal handling and dry
dock facilities. And so comments in their media
release was that the local fishing ves- vessel operators
also appreciate the change when bringing vessels in from the sea.
So essentially they can now see where they're going.
They're not blinded by the, the, the poor lighting
previously. Nearby residents have benefited from the
upgrade with the change from tilted lights producing glare and spill to
sustainable and directional lighting that points where it's needed and not where it
isn't. The move from halogen to warm
white LED also pro- provides benefits in terms
of the warmth of color, but is more sustainable and energy
efficient. So that warm warmth that Brian mentioned is
important ecologically.
3,000 Kelvin LEDs, warm white, were
selected to-
If I can, if I can cut in now. Sorry, Steve.
Yeah.
I think what we are proposing is a Section
14, 2BA-
Yeah
... to add artificial light at night.
We are not-- That only allows those
councils that are interested to voluntarily have
some, flexibility. So the
lighting, we are not a, we are not light police.
This is all about responsible lighting, voluntarily choos-
chosen by councils and district councils.
At the moment it's costing $80,000 to
$100,000 to get the light regulation
done. Each of these 10 dark sky places are spending large amounts of
money. If there is flexibility, they have the
voluntary right to adopt. Nobody's imposing any controls
over anyone. So if the planning bill just
has one section that says,
"14BA, artificial light at night," it gives
flexibility. It doesn't impose any rules. It doesn't do anything.
It just allows some kind of choice to these
local and district councils that are keen to
progress. There are 30 aspiring dark sky places.
We already have 10, and we are en route to becoming a dark
sky nation. A private member's bill has been drafted.
It has been submitted as a supplementary submission.
Jaden tells us, you know, it's, it's, been done
cross-party. We have got support from government parties.
If there are 30 aspiring places and 10 accredited places,
there are 40 MPs who are aware of dark skies, and they're
supporting this. So we hope that it can go in
the biscuit tin and come out with 60 MPs supporting
it. And that's still there. It's available to you to look at,
and I'll stop here. Uh, it's pretty advanced, and nobody's
imposing any rules or standards, but allowing
voluntary selection.
Y- thank you. I think you, you and Steve have made your points really well.
That summed it up really, really well.
Um, and, yeah, and we are, I am conscious of the fact that there's a private
member's bill, so thank you for hiring that.
It doesn't appear there are any questions, so look, thanks very much
for your submissions. You made the points well, and, yeah, thanks a lot,
eh? And, well, and, and have a great day. Thank you very much.
Appreciate all your work. Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh,
so we move to Independent Electricity Generators
Association.
Hi. I'm just waiting for two of my colleagues,
I can't see them on screen. Just see- Oh, yes.
Are you there? We've got it covered here.
Yeah, yeah. Cool.
Good, good. G'day, g'day, g'day. Um, I'm Grant Callum.
I'm, I'm chairing this subcommittee.
Uh, we have 15 minutes with you today. We have your submission.
Feel free to take it as read, but feel free to highlight one or two points, and
then we have l- leave time for questions. Fire away. Floor is yours.
Thank you, Chair, and, and your committee for giving us this opportunity
to, to discuss our submission. Um, I'm Maryanne
Mitchell, the executive officer for the Independent Electricity
Generators Association, or we call it the IEGA.
This association represents 25 independent generators
who own and operate smaller scale renewable generation
facilities throughout New Zealand.
As a group, we're New Zealand's fifth largest generator,
which makes us critically important to New Zealand's security of
supply, both now and into the future.
Our members have assets ranging from 100 days old to 100 years old
across all renewable technologies.
We support the government's objectives that guided the development of this new
legislation to make it easier to get things done to enable
delivery of high quality infrastructure, including doubling
renewable energy. We suggest improvements should be made to
enable doubling of renewable energy, but as
importantly, to enable ongoing use of New Zealand's existing
renewable energy infrastructure.Uh, with me today, I
have Ben Gibson, Strategic Project Manager at
Eastland Generation and Chair of the Iega, and also
James Flexman, who's General Manager of Pioneer Energy
Renewables. Ben and James will provide the committee with some
practical insights that support the recommendations in our written
submission. I'll hand over to Ben now, to make a few comments,
and he'll h-hand over to James, and then we're happy to answer any of your
questions. Thanks.
Well, good morning. Um, Ben Gibson, Strategic Project Manager with
Eastland. Um, first of all, I'd just like to
commend the government on the release of the geothermal
strategy yesterday. I think that's a really great
initiative and will do a lot for the, the geothermal
industry, especially as we start to, or continue down
the, the energy transition, and de-continue to
decarbonize New Zealand. I think this will be a, a, a really great initiative,
and ge-geothermal plays a big part of that, along with a
number of the other plants and, and projects that, members of the
Iega are working on.
Um, I just want to touch on, geothermal a little bit in terms
of, especially the re-consenting frameworks
and some of the, the practicalities that we're seeing
here. Um, geothermal is one of those
unique, industries where we are not necessarily a
consumptive, take. We m-manage those
steam fields and, and fields in a very, sustainable
manner. The amount of capital that we have employed on those, those steam
fields drives us to make sure that we've got sustainable
long-term, investments and, decisions about how
we manage those resources. So we do undertake extensive
monitoring, we undertake adaptive management, so if we see things
happen in a field, then we respond and adapt to that.
We undertake a lot of modeling, and we also have a very
thorough, annual reporting process with
regional councils. Um, and so
peer review panels making sure that those resources are being managed in a
very, sustainable and,
professional manner. What that lends us to
is a framework where we come to the end of a consent
and, you know, we have been doing all of the things that we need to have been
doing. Councils have may not have actually invoked res-
review conditions to change how we are working.
So we feel as though we get to that point, we should have an
aut- almost an automatic rollover of those, those resource
consents. We're going to continue to monitor, we're going to continue to
manage, and we're going to continue to adaptively manage, most importantly.
So in considering the amount of capital we have employed, to
actually cease that production creates a whole heap of risk for our,
our investments and our investment decisions.
These are, are very long-term assets, and they need to have a very long-term
framework around how they are, they are managed and re-consented.
So I think I'll leave you with that point, that, you know, we think there needs to
be a better framework around the renewal of resource
consents, not only in the geothermal sector, but in,
in also in some of the other sectors.
And I'll, I'll let James perhaps touch on
hydro.
You're just on mute, James.
You're right. Go for it, James. You're
right. Talk, I
think.
Is that better?
Yeah. Gotcha.
Yeah.
Okay. Um, sorry about that. Good morning, everyone.
And, as Marianne said, my name is James Flexman.
I'm the General Manager at Pioneer Energy Renewables, but today I'm here on
behalf of the Iega and, of which Pioneer Energy is a, is a
member. Um, and what I'll do in the next few minutes is just provide some context
to one of the points we've made in our submission which, relates to the
consenting of small scale hydropower schemes.
So specifically, what we're advocating for, as you will have read, is that the
consenting processes for small scale renewable electricity generation
is proportionate to the scale of those facilities.
Small scale electricity generation infrastructure, such as that owned by our
members, plays and will continue to play in the future a vital
role in meeting our current and future electricity demand in the
country. And given this vital role, it is
crucial and critical that the consenting regime is proportionate to
the scale of these facilities so that the consenting and re-consenting
of them is not prohibita-prohibitively onerous or
expensive. And the concern we have with the current drafting of the bill is it
proposes a one size fits all approach, which looks,
locks in the need to engage planning consultants,
lawyers, ecologists, geologists, hydrologists,
sedimentation modelers, reservoir modelers, consenting experts, consenting
panels, and of course consenting authorities.
And in many cases, and I'm not sure this is a well-understood point, but in many
cases, the applicants need to also fund many of these experts
twice as the consenting authorities feel obliged
to de-risk any decisions they make by obtaining a peer
review of the advice and conclusions reported by the applicant's independent
experts. And that's despite those experts, in our view, having a professional
reputation to uphold, meaning they're strongly disincentivized
to report conclusions that cannot stand up and hold up to scrutiny.
And why is this important? And it's because of the cost of these processes is
high, not just for us, but, but, it is for
everyone, but for the small scale generators like ourselves, it is
disproportionately high and often exorbitant.
Now on Friday, I think some of you probably heard the submission made by Meridian
Energy, who stated that their re-consenting process of their Waitaki
hydro scheme has to date cost them fourteen million
dollars. And appropriately, I, I saw on the video footage that a
number of the committee were pretty shocked to hear that number.
Um-For context, I'm currently re-consenting one of our
hydro stations in the Bay of Plenty region in the North Island, the Anawhenua Hydro
Scheme. And to give you some context to the scale
of this dispro- disproportionate cost issue, the cost
relative... the relative cost to me of our re-consenting process in
dollars per unit of output per year is five times that of
Meridian based on those, quoted numbers.
So it's a significant impost.
Yeah. Thank you.
And the point of making that comparison is to highlight that the process of
consenting small scale renewable generation and infrastructure in this
country is extremely high, and in our view, which I actually note
is, is shared, our view is shared by some of those other larger generator
retailers, through their submissions over the last few days,
this issue could be addressed through this legislation.
And so how might this be done? Well, the first point has been made just moments ago
about geothermal generation, is the allowing of the rollover
existing consents for small scale generation facilities for the fur- fur- for a
further period of, say, 15 years, ideally longer.
As Ben said, we all have existing consent conditions, compliance with these is
monitored, and where the effects are not being adequately managed or consent
conditions are not being met, then the territorial authorities have,
processes to step in, to step in and act.
And of course, if conditions are not being met, then the automatic rollover rights
could easily be voided. The second point,
to help reduce these costs would be to reclassify any renewable electricity
generation facilities that were classified or are classified under the
current legislation, as, as being,
contr- as controlled activities, be reclassified in the new legislation as
permitted activities. And that would mean the consent applications would
not be required for those small scale facilities, and asset owners
would instead be required to comply with standardized consistent
conditions for their assets and operations.
And of course, compliance with those would continue to be monitored in the usual
way. And the third and final point that I wanted to raise
is, for s- for, for those facilities, that our members own
that... and, and for others who are operating and owning small scale
renewable generation infrastructure, for the facilities that do not meet the
permitted activity definition I just talked about, then we should establish or look
to establish an expert panel such as that which was established under the
fast track approvals process. That expert panel could
consider the renewable electricity generation consent applications in a slimmed
down process that is appropriate for the scale of the facilities and its
corresponding environmental effects, and from that con- their consideration, make a
decision on any of those applications.
Uh, so there, there's a f- just a few thoughts there around how we can see this
legislation supporting the development of small scale renewable generation.
I'll just now quickly pass back to Ben, who can talk and give you some examples
about solar.
Yeah. I just want to... We had one interesting, sort of observation, and I'm
not sure if any of you have flown over the Bay of Plenty recently
and started to see the, pretty extensive shrink
wrapping of, of the region, through kiwifruit orchards
and, some of that, that, that horticultural.
What we're seeing is almost a, a, a disproportionate,
approach towards solar versus, um-
Shrink wrapping
... like kiwifruit. You know, we have the visual impact, but
these kiwifruit orchards are almost, you know, they're, they're unconsented,
ubiquitous kind of activities. We feel as though there is sort of a,
not necessarily a bias, but a, you know, a, a, quite a different
consenting regime when it comes to horticulture versus, renewable
energy. So, if we're going to continue to shrink wrap,
vast tracts of, o- o- of, of the
region, versus some s- you know, solar and renewable
activities, I th- we feel as though there needs to be some sort of balance
there.
Okay. Okay. Well, so t- happy to take questions now, team?
Yes.
Right. Excellent. Well, Scott Willis has the first question, then I might follow up
after that if I've got time. But I presume you're sitting in for Lana on this one,
Scott.
Yes.
Thank you. Sweet.
Uh, thank you very much, and great submission.
And I think you've made a really important point that smaller projects, such as
those that are represented by the Iega, do face
barriers with this one size fits all,
thing. And, and I'm very sympathetic having tried to build a small
wind farm, as you probably know, James, that cost over
$500,000, to fail on visual
impact. So, you know, thinking about
those barriers in the, the re-consenting side of it,
what about the national environmental standards as well as a
small scale, small, an expert panel?
Is this something that you want to see given that we do want to see distributed
energy resources? That's one question.
And, and, Chair, if I could follow up, I've got a second.
No, go. Yep, go on.
So the question is, national environmental
standards for those smaller scale that would make them
controlled or permitted activities, this is something
that was promoted in the 2010 national policy statement, never
im- implemented. You want to see that?
Is that, is that
w- where we're going?
I think, Scott, absolutely. The way that, that,
that, that change of classification from a controlled activity to a permitted
activity is managed through the, national standards
process and, and dir- and national direction.
So I think that is how the legislation would give effect to that
and make that possible. So very...
absolutely support that and, and the steps that would've been made in the past.
That's how we see that working.
But we don't... Okay. But we don't yet have them, so we, we, we need to make sure
that they are appropriate.
Exactly.
Okay. Second, second question, if I may, Chair.
Fire away. Yep.
Um, so
James, this is particularly directed at you, given that, Pioneer has worked
really well with Powernet,
and-I'm really interested in what, what are your
thoughts, both of you, on the,
local area energy planning, which
we-- which, which would involve more of a sort of a, a
regional approach, spatial planning but with
more, more players involved, local government, iwi,
community, EDBs, along with developers.
What are your thoughts around an approach that is a bit more integrated?
If, if I start, Ian, you may have some other views as well, but I, I th- we
would absolutely support that, Scott.
The-- We are looking to consent a wind farm, as you're, you're familiar with down
in Southland at the moment, and one of the challenges we've had is
to... Actually, what, what, what's happened, we have delayed our lodging of that
consent to engage in more broader commun- with the g- with the
broader community. Um, and
we, we were ready to lodge a consent about eighteen months ago and chose not to so
that we could do more thorough, community le-
engagement, both with community and, and iwi.
Um, eighteen months later, we've just received advice that, one of
those collective groups is saying, "No, we, we're not gonna
support this application, and we will just be a submitter in the process." So
we've waited and worked hard for eighteen months to try and get some progress and
to ensure the consi- conditions to meet that stakeholder's, if you like,
e-expectations can be managed well.
Um, and we've, we've engaged in good faith, we believe, to make that happen, only
now, eighteen months later, to be, to be told that, "No, sorry, we're not
gonna support this. Um, we're gonna just see you at, at the hearing."
So far more, you know,
a-a-as you describe, a more joined up, approach for
managing consent applications right across all of those
different constituents would be very, very helpful.
Yeah.
And the spatial planning, you know, could, could support that, of
course.
So that's facilitation. I'll, I'll leave it there. Thank you.
Yeah, thanks, team. Well, we've actually run out of time.
We use that fifteen minutes, but thank you very much.
Um, great, great submission, really practical.
And, your concept around the reconsidering stuff is not as,
as you've obviously observed, something that's come through from a number of others
as well. So thank you very much and, have a great day. Cheers.
Thanks.
You too. Thanks.
So now we have Te Kahui Maru
Trust.
Tena koutou.
Yeah, kia ora. Good morning, morning, morning. Uh, yes, it's still just morning.
Um, look, I'm Grant McKenna. I'm the chair in this select committee.
Um, so, please feel free to...
We've got fifteen minutes with you now.
Um, we-- please take your submission as read, but feel free to highlight a few key
points and then leave room for questions. Thank you.
Awesome. Thank you. Um, my name is Casey Valme.
I am the environmental lead at Te Kahui Maru Trust, and with me today
is our CE, Anaru Marshall. Uh, Te Kahui Maru Trust is the
post-settlement governance entity for Te Iwi o Maru Wharanui or Ngati
Maru Taranaki. Uh, we appreciate the opportunity to make an
oral submission on the Planning Bill and Natural Environment Bill.
I will take our submission as read and take a few minutes to provide an overview of
our key concerns with the new bills.
So the first relates to the ability to uphold our treaty settlement
redress. Our treaty settlement includes three key redress
mechanisms which relate to functions under the Resource Management Act.
These are the Joint Management Agreement for the Waitara River, the Marutaia
Plan, and our statutory acknowledgements.
Starting with the Joint Management Agreement, significant changes are
proposed to consenting processes, including the removal of
limited notification and reduced effects thres- thresholds,
which will limit our ability to participate in consenting processes
and impact how the consenting pro- provisions in our treaty settlement
operate. Uh, specific reference is made to Section
6E of the RMA and other criteria under the RMA,
including Sections seven A and Eight
under this, section of our treaty settlement.
So in our view, it is necessary that Part Two RMA matters are carried
over into the new system to ensure that this aspect of our treaty settlement
redress can be upheld. This section of our treaty
settlement legislation also requires Ngati Maru to be identified as
affected parties for mining activities within Aotearoa.
With the proposed changes to resource consenting processes, all
mining activities in Aotearoa will require public notification if this
aspect of our treaty settlement redresses to be upheld.
Um, certain JMA functions, are to be carried out by
the Waitara River Committee. This is a committee established under a
separate piece of legislation, the Waitara Lands Act, for the
purpose of restoring, protecting, and enhancing the health of the Waitara
River. The Waitara Lands Act provides redress for
historical grievances committed by the Crown towards Tangata Whenua
in Waitara and along the Waitara River, and it interacts with our
treaty settlement legislation. Therefore, we,
considered that it should be treated as an other arrangement to be upheld
through the resource management reform process.
The establishment and function of the Waitara River C-
Committee is another important consideration as part of local government
reforms, as the committee is comprised of five representatives from the
Taranaki Regional Council and five iwi hapu
reps. Uh, to the Marutaia
Plan. As the requirements for the Marutaia
Plan primarily re-relate to plans and plan making, we
believe that this aspect of our treaty settlement redress can be carried over into
the new system. Explicit, provisions will be,
need to be included in the bills and other instruments to
ensure that it has the same or equivalent effect under the new system,
but we do not think that this, should be difficultUh, for
our statutory acknowledgments, the significant changes
proposed to consenting processes under the new bills will limit
the effect and operation of our statutory acknowledgments.
So it will be difficult to uphold, this aspect of our treaty settlement
redress to the same or equivalent effect under the new system unless
substantial changes are made. Another key concern
for us is that despite the recommendations of the expert panel on resource
management reform, the new bills do not contain an equivalent to Section
6E or Section 8 of the RMA, and the bills are
silent on cultural values such as Kaitiakitanga, which is captured in
Section 7A of the RMA. We think that the new system
goals to recognize Māori interests through three specific avenues are
a regression from the status quo. In the absence of provisions
equivalent to Part 2, the adva- the ability to uphold our
treaty settlement redress will be compromised as this underlying framework and
the existing protections in place under Part 2 of the RMA
formed part of the context under which our treaty settlement was
negotiated. Other key concerns that we
have, as raised in our written submission, include the reduction of
existing environmental and cultural protections, the lack of Māori
input during the policy development process for the bills, the
narrowing of the scope of Māori rights and interests, the dilution of
the Crown's obligations in relation to Te Tiriti o Waitangi and its
principles, the ability to uphold our treaty settlement redress
and other arrangements to the same or equivalent effect, the
system goals and the funnel approach, the effects to
be disregarded, interpretation, the
separation into two separate bills, the removal of Māori
participation tools under the RMA, so the transfer of
powers, joint management agreements and Mana Whakawhanui Aroha
provisions, Māori participation in the development of
national instruments, regional spatial plans, land use plans and natural
environment plans, and in consenting and permitting processes,
consents and permits, the effects management
hierarchy, the regulatory relief framework, the
environmental limits framework, allocation,
standing, standardized zones and provisions, and,
evaluation and justification
reports. So we strongly oppose the new bills
as they currently stand. Uh, several recommendations are made in our
written submission to the address the issues we have raised.
While we acknowledge that improvements are needed to the resource management
system, we consider the new bills are too heavily skewed towards the
promotion of growth and economic development, and that they would benefit from
stronger environmental and cultural protections.
Resource management reform is complex.
It shouldn't be rushed, and needs to be evidence-based and should have
bipartisan support. Our resource management system needs to be
effective and robust, enable better outcomes for communities and
the environment, protect what we value, and enable our cities
and countryside
to be great places to live, work and play.
We believe significant improvements are needed to achieve these
outcomes. Thank you again for the opportunity to make an oral
submission on the bills. We welcome any questions from the
panel.
Um, yeah, I'll just touch on that, that, one of your la-last points there.
You highlight the, the balance of the bills between environmental
protection and economic development.
Where, where, where, how would you like to s-see that shifted, be-
given obviously you need the economic development to be able to in, in some
many ways to protect the environment as well.
So how would you like to see that shifted?
Absolutely. Yeah, and I totally agree with that point that you've made, too.
We're not anti-development per se, but I just think
that,
there are opportunities to elevate those environmental and cultural protections
higher in the act, in the bills.
And I think a key way to do that would be,
explicitly outlining the hierarchy in, in the new bills.
Yeah, so towards environmental and cultural protections, so enabling
economic development while, you know, promoting
those, protectionary measures.
Thank you. Uh, Scott Willis.
Oh, kia ora Casey and, and Nga Riu. Thank you. Um, great submission.
And I, I'm just thinking about the energy space
and, the, the, the challenge we have when we don't
quite know what those national environmental standards would be,
yet, but you're, you're, you're essentially arguing that we need
to ge-get those right. I guess my question, similar to what
I was asking earlier, is, you know, would some
facilitation for local area energy planning that required
iwi to be involved along with developers, local
government, the electricity,
distribution boards, would that, would that be a, a
useful pathway to ensure that we've got, we've got,
broad spectrum support for
the development that iwi are always
involved?
Absolutely. That would, that would definitely be something that we would
support. And so I, I guess that would,
that direction would need to go into the national
instruments around the, w- how
the, how those, regional groups will be formed.
But yeah, that would definitely be something that, that we
think would work.
Okay. Well, looks like there doesn't appear to be any further questions, but
thank you very much for a very informative submission and, well detailed
written submission. Really appreciate it.
Um, so, th- thank you very much and have a great day. Cheers.
Thank you. You too.
Bye.
Ka kite. See you.
I believe our next submitter, Auckland Airport, is online.
Last one before lunch.
Yeah, here we go. Morning, morning, morning.
G'day. Uh, Grant McCallum, I'm the,
chair of this, subcommittee of the Environment Select Committee.
We have, fifteen minutes of-for you today. Thank you very much.
And we have, we have your submission.
Please take it as read, but feel free to highlight a few key points and leave us
some time for questions. Floor is yours.
Thank you.
Thank you, and thank you for the opportunity to present today.
Um, I'm Andrea Marshall. I'm the head of Environmental Planning and Sustainability
at Auckland Airport, and I'm joined by Lucy Edwards, Principal
Environmental Planner, and Clodah O'Connor McKenna, our Government
Affairs Manager. Overall, Auckland Airport supports the
intent of the bills and their aim to simplify planning to promote
growth. However, as set out in our
submission, there are certain changes to the bills that we consider would
further enhance the protection of significant
infrastructure. Um, Auckland Airport is New Zealand's
gateway. Um, more than two-thirds of New Zealand's international visitors
enter the country via Auckland, with twenty-seven airlines
flying to forty-two destinations around New Zealand and the world.
And planes don't just carry people, they carry high-value
freight. Um, Auckland Airport is New Zealand's third largest
port by value of goods moved. One daily
wide-body flight over a year brings in more than a hundred and
fifty million dollars of tourism spend and carries half a
billion dollars of freight.
All that economic value relies on infrastructure that's provided by
Auckland Airport. We are currently investing significantly
to increase resilience and to lift the capacity of the
airport. Because of this contribution to the
economy, we see it as critical that the planning system preserves
Auckland Airport's ability to operate twenty-four seven and to
grow as demand dictates. However, while at the
same time, we need to recognize that we exist within the wider
South Auckland community, and we're unable to internalize all
our noise effects.
I'll now hand over to Lucy, who will speak, about three specific
aspects of our submission.
Thank you. Um, I'll start with reverse sensitivity.
Auckland Airport recognizes the importance of enabling residential development and
supports growth occurring in the right places through a managed planning
framework that protects both communities and nationally significant
infrastructure. Aircraft noise is an unavoidable
consequence of operating an airport.
Where noise-sensitive activities, such as residential dwellings or schools, are
established or intensified in areas of high aircraft noise, this
can result in significant annoyance and adverse health effects on
residents. A World Health Organization study shows that at noise
levels within Auckland Airport's moderate aircraft noise area,
approximately thirty-six to forty-six percent of people are likely to be highly
annoyed. In the high aircraft noise area, this increases
to around forty-six to sixty percent.
At high levels, aircraft noise interrupts speech, both indoors and
outdoors, and disturbs sleep, with international studies documenting
associated health effects. At current
levels, there is approximately one arrival every four to five minutes on a peak
day between seven AM and ten PM, and this will inc-increase to around
every three to four minutes by twenty thirty-eight.
In a typical single flyover event at the outer edge of the moderate aircraft
noise area, it may be necessary for residents in the outdoor environment to
shout or pause a conversation for approximately thirty seconds every time an
aircraft passes, resulting in frequent interruptions to
conversation. In turn, this
gives rise to complaints against the airport's operations and submissions on
planning processes seeking to constrain those operations.
This is known as a reverse sensitivity effect.
Existing planning tools, such as aircraft noise overlays, play a critical
role in managing this risk. This is done in a balanced way,
allowing noise sensitive development in the right places, while ensuring that
the infrastructure that supports economic growth can continue to operate and
develop. Reverse sensitivity is not a
theoretical concern. Overseas, similar pressures have led to curfews and
movement caps at major airports, with serious consequences for
connectivity and economic performance.
The existing planning framework already includes a curfew that will place
operational constraints on Auckland Airport's future second
runway. Given that global aircraft slot management
dictates international flight schedules, Auckland Airport typically
can't choose when flights come in or depart.
Any further nighttime restrictions would be particularly damaging given Auckland
Airport's role as New Zealand's gateway and a critical freight
hub.
As set out in our submission, while standardization may be appropriate in certain
circumstances, it's essential that the new system retains flexibility
for councils to include bespoke provisions where operational
requirements or the management of the reverse sensitivity effects
necessitate a tailored approach.
This leads into my second point around regulatory relief.
Auckland Airport agrees that the proposed regulatory relief regime should not apply
to planning controls that are necessary for the safe and efficient operation of
infrastructure or the protection of public health and safety.
For example, aircraft noise overlays and obstacle limitation
surfaces. These controls protect health and safety and
operational certainty. They are localized, tested, and already
embedded in the planning framework and land use expectations.
If the regulatory relief regime is extended to these provisions,
there is a real risk that council will choose not to include them due to
cost. It is a crit-- it is critical that the scope of any regulatory
relief regime does not undermine the use of these carefully developed and tested
controls, and Auckland Airport does not have a view on that-- on the wider issue
of, of regulatory reliefOur
final point is that engagement with infrastructure providers is critical.
Auckland Airport supports the direction of the new bills.
However, they leave much of the detail to be decided through national instruments
and regional spatial planning.
It is vital that infrastructure providers are afforded adequate time to input
into these instruments so that we get durable, workable rules the
first time. If we rush this, we risk locking in the
wrong national settings and creating unintended consequences for
infrastructure providers and communities.
Further time and cost would have to be spent down the track revising the
documents, resulting in uncertainty and potentially delay
infrastructure delivery. We have therefore suggested amendments within
our submission that would ensure that there is sufficient time for
stakeholders, including infrastructure providers, to provide meaningful
feedback. Thank you for your time today, and we are happy to take
any questions.
Yeah, thank you. Thank you very much for your submission. Um, great.
Uh, well, I'll, I'll kick it off. The, y- I'm really intrigued
with your, um... So the regulatory relief, you've
obviously got exemptions currently under the, w- with
the, with what we've, from what we're proposing.
Is, is your reading of the proposed bills, is that carrying over
or not?
Yeah. So we are happy... But we sort of don't have a view on the wider regulatory
relief, but we just think that-
Yeah, I, I appreciate that, but yeah
... not extended to... We know that some submitters have sought that that regime is
extended. Um, we think that the controls we're talking about are fundamental
planning controls. They're not sort of optional planning rules.
Mm.
Um, they're localized, limited in geo-geographic consent, and
they're already embedded into land use expectations.
So, yeah, our submi- key submission point is that just that that regime
is not extended to those controls.
Understand. Understand. Okay, got that.
Um, Ryan Hamilton has a question.
Uh, thanks, Chair. Uh, obviously, most of your submission
points were fairly straightforward.
I just, o- obviously, a big key for you guys is ensuring those existing
designations roll over.
Mm.
Um, was there some concern when you were reading the draft
that they could be at risk?
Yeah. I think what we're seeking within our
submission is that I think to give effect to government's
intent to, to have more efficiency under the new system and reduce
litigation, there's the potential to ensure that
designations that are rolled over unmodified, are not
subject to re-litigation. Notice of r- of requirements currently
are, are comprehensive, costly, and, and very timely
processes. Um, and they often result in contested
hearings, and the, the, the final decision is sort of settled
planning outcomes. And currently as drafted, every time a plan
review happens, the, the whole designation is
open to, to that re-litigation, even if it's not being modified.
So what we've submitted is that, when designations are rolled over, that
public participation and scrutiny should certainly be available for those
modifications. Um, but when it's not being modified,
it should be rolled over as is to provide for, for certainty for infrastructure
providers.
Thanks. And a- another theme you've raised, which has been quite fre- frequent
also, is permitted activities not having to require registration.
It seems counterintuitive to the intent of the bill.
Yeah, completely. Um, and I know that's been, you know, as you say,
raised by a number of submissions, by s- a number of submitters.
We think that, yeah, if you required every permitted activity to
be registered, that's extremely onerous, not only for, the, the
developer or the plan user, but also for council.
Um, I think we operate under quite an enabling planning regime
currently. Um, we, we utilize a lot of permitted activities, and if we were
having to, um-
Mm
... notify council of each one, and then council had to register that and
then give us sort of a notification back that that permitted activity was
actually permitted-
Terrible
... that's, yeah, that's extremely onerous for us.
So, we're, we're keen that if, national
standards, expressly state that permitted activities can--
should be registered, then they have to be registered.
Uh, and national standards can, can also preclude those activities from being
registered. So, so that seems like a good way to get that balance.
Cool. Thank you. Thanks for that.
Um, I'm, I'm just... And a follow-on other question too, sort of similar.
I'm assuming that you have a number of designations for the, your,
operations?
Yeah. We currently have three designations for our operations.
Our key designation, the one that we sort of operate our
aircraft activities, and, and development
under, is sort of our, our biggest one, and then we also have
a designation for our obstacle limitation services, which is
sort of ensuring that activities surrounding the airport don't impinge on flight
paths and things, and then another smaller designation.
So yeah, we have, we have one key one that, sort of
enables our, our development and our aircraft
activities to operate, and then-
Yeah
... another key one that protects those operations.
Yeah, I suppose, 'cause the point I'm sort of leading to there is we found with,
for example, Tauranga Port, they had different, con-
regimes, and they didn't all line up.
Yeah.
So one could come in at a different time and create issues.
Do you have anything like that? You know, that was, you know...
Do they all line up when they r- have to be re- redesignated or, or are they
separate timings?
Yeah. I think, and I can definitely see from a port's, you know, perspective in
terms of operating in the coastal environment and having to sort of obtain those
consents, that that's a real concern.
Um, Auckland Airport is really fortunate to have quite a
permissive and enabling pr- planning framework currently.
So we operate under those designations.
Um, under that sits a precinct with sort of enabling precinct provisions that
allow for sort of our, our activities and operations across the
precinct. Um, and so the key, the key thing for us is that
that enabling planning f- framework is enabled, under the new
system.
And just one final question. So just wanna understand something.
Like, with, obviously, with your designations and how your work,
like we struck a situation which has been more or less
resolved up in, in Whangarei where they put a, bought a,
um-- Whangarei Airport, they brought in the rescue helicopter services
came to be located. Even though it was an airport and there were operating
helicopters there, that led to a whole lot of d-
objection from, from local people.
Do you have any issues around that sort of thing? Where if you, if you, if you...
Or is your designation such that if you increase the number of flights
or within, within timeframes, do you have any problems in that
space?
So we are having problems with helicopter movements.
Um, so our-
Yeah. Yeah
... our designation is around the main flight, the flight
paths-
Yep
... associated with the runway. Um, when an introduction of a new
flight path for a helicopter pad,
within our designated land, that is presenting issues for us, and
yet it's, you know, a helicopter is core aeronautical activity.
Unfortunately.
And so that's bringing a new, regime because it's following,
a flight path that is outside of our traditional
contours.
And what... Yeah. Yeah. So, and so how, how are
you... So how are you handling that? 'Cause that's obviously...
I mean, I presume that could be a rescue helicopter or anything be based there in
that sense, couldn't it?
So we're having to treat that as a resource consent application
under, the unitary plan and
demonstrating, the number of flight movements
as sitting within the permitted activity, for the
noise standards for the wider region.
Um, what that has meant is it's really cur- curtailed the
extent that that helicopter pad can be used, even
though it's sitting on our land, and within our con- within our
designation.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. No, we're just-- We've had similar issues up north, but
okay. Look, thank you. That's very good.
Um, no further questions it would appear, so look, thank you very much for your
submission. Very, very good. You've highlighted your key points well, and,
thanks a lot. Have a great day. Cheers.
Thank you.
See you. Bye. Righto, team, I believe that is
lunch. Okay. So we'll see you again twelve thirty
start.